## Lecture 1: Integers and the Binary System 

Natural numbers are the sequence of numbers
$$0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,...$$
where we can define
* addition $a+b$ as the union of $a$ apples and $b$ apples
* multiplication $a*b$ as the stack of $a$ rows of $b$ apples  

Let’s use:

- `a = 2` → 🔵 🔵  
- `b = 3` → 🟢 🟢 🟢

Then  $a + b$ is defined as

🔵 🔵 🔵   🟢 🟢

and $ab$ is defined as 
🔵 🔵 🔵  
🔵 🔵 🔵

* Here we only define addition and multiplication for two numbers. 
* subtraction and division can be thought as the inverse process of additional and multiplication so we omit here.


**Basic Laws**:
Euler told us to use $a,b,c,...$ for a specific number (and $x,y,z,...$ for unkonwns). So for a given natural number, we use $a,b,c,...$ to denote a number, which is the essence of the **algebra**.

The addition and multiplication of natural numbers has the following fundamental laws. It is very helpful to use the above naive definition to think geometrically.
* Commutative law
    * $a+b=b+a$
    * $ab=ba$
* Associative law
    * $(a+b)+c=a+(b+c)$
    * $(ab)c=a(bc)$ (what is the geometric meaning?)
* Distributive law
    * $a(b+c)=ab+ac$
    * $(a+b)c=ac+bc$

**Proof of commutative laws** 
Let’s use:

- `a = 2` → 🔵 🔵  
- `b = 3` → 🟢 🟢 🟢

$a + b$ is 


🔵 🔵 🔵   🟢 🟢

and $b+a$ is 

🟢 🟢   🔵 🔵 🔵

Similarly, $a*b$ is 
🔵 🔵 🔵  
🔵 🔵 🔵
and $b*a$ is 
🔵 🔵  
🔵 🔵  
🔵 🔵

Thus the commutative laws for addition and multiplication are proved.


**Comments**:
* Commutative and associative laws tell us how to combine and rearrange the operation does not matter. That is good for simple calculation like below:
$$(4*156)*25=25*(4*156)=(25*4)*156=15600$$
* Distributive law can help:
$$8*127=8*(125+2)=1016$$
* The last one is derived by commutative and distributive law.
$$(a+b)c=c(a+b)=ca+cb=ac+bc$$

**Decimal system**
With addition and multiplication, we can rigorously define the decimal system:
$$756=7*100+5*10+6$$
which make verticle calculation easy to do.

**Binary system**
We use decimal system because we have $10$ fingers. What if there is a parallel world with only two-fingers people? What does their math look like? They will only introduce two digits $0$ and $1$ and create their binary system as below 

```
1, 10, 11, 100, 101, 110, 111, 1000, 1001, 1010, 1011, ...
```

which corresponds to the natural numbers up to $(1011)_2=(11)_{10}$.

* the expansion of $1011$ can be defined similarly:
$$1011=1*2^3+0*2^2+1*2^1+1*2^0=11$$

* conversely, any decimal number can be converted to a binary by taking repetivie division by $2$:
$11=2*5+1$
$5=2*2+1$
$2=2*1+0$
$1=1$
and taking the remainder inversely. 

* all vertical calculation carries the same way by only remembering you can not use $2,3,...,9$.

* Addition
    * $11+11=110$
    * $111+111=1110$
* Multiplication
    * $11*10=110$
    * $11*111=10001$
* Substraction
    * $10000-101=1+1111-101=1011$
* Division
    * $1001/11=11$
    * So $1001$ is not a prime number in binary case.
    * $1/11=0.010101....$
* Please verify each step their decimal case.

**Natural number via Peano Axioms**
If we would like to define natural number independent of aliens and fingers, Peano Axoim for natural numbers is one solution:
* $0$ is a natural number.
* We have the next operator $S$. For every natural number $a$, $S(a)$ is a natural number (the next number).
* If $S(a)=S(b)$ then $a=b$.
* $S(a)$ is never $0$.

So $1=S(0)$, $2=S(1)=S(S(0))$,.... 

This does not depend on binary, decimal systems.

* Addition: $a+0=a$ and $a+S(b)=S(a+b)$

**Lemma 1**: $a+S(0)=S(a)$; in other words, $a+1=S(a)$

**Lemma 2**: $0+b=b$

* First we know $0+0=0$ by definition. 
* Then $0+1=0+S(0)=S(0+0)=S(0)=1$.
* Then $0+2=0+S(1)=S(0+1)=S(1)=2$.
* Then repeat on previous steps forever.
* QED

**Lemma 3**: $S(a)+b=S(a+b)$

* First we know $S(a)+0=S(a)=S(a+0)$. 
* Then $S(a)+1=S(a)+S(0)=S(S(a)+0)=S(S(a))=S(a+1)$.
* Then $S(a)+2=S(a)+S(1)=S(S(a)+1)=S(S(a+1))=S(a+2)$.
* Then repeat on previous steps forever.
* QED

**Theorem**: $a+b=b+a$

* First we know $a+0=a=0+a$ by Lemma 2. 
* Then $a+1=a+S(0)=S(a+0)=S(a)=S(0)+a=1+a$.
* Then $a+2=a+S(1)=S(a+1)=S(1+a)=S(1)+a=2+a$.
* Then repeat on previous steps forever.
* QED

<!--

**Negative numbers**

* We define $-a$ as a new multiplication $(-1)*a$ for any natural number. 
* If we enforce distributive rule, then 
$$(-a)+a=(-1)a+1*a=(-1+1)a=0$$
* What is $(-1)(-1)$? If we enforce distributive law,
$$(-1)(-1)+1(-1)=(-1+1)1=0$$
Since $1(-1)=-1$, $(-1)(-1)=1.$