## Lecture 8: Polynomials in one variable

### Definition  
We will use $x$ for the unknown variable and $a, b, c, \ldots$ as fixed numbers.

- **Linear:** $ax + b$
- **Quadratic:** $ax^2 + bx + c$
- **Cubic:** $ax^3 + bx^2 + cx + d = 0$
- **In general:**
$$
  f(x)=a_nx^n + a_{n-1}x^{n-1} + \cdots + a_1x + a_0 
  $$
  is a **polynomial** of degree $n$. The **roots** of $f(x)$ are values $x_0$ such that $f(x_0) = 0$. The **coefficients** of $f(x)$ are $a_n, \ldots, a_0$.

### Additions and subtractions
We only need to align the degree and make corresponding coefficient addition and subtraction.

**Examples**
* $(x+1)+(x^6+5x^2-4x+4)=x^6+5x^2-3x+5$
* $(x^2-3x+1)-(x^2-1)=-3x+2$
* $-(x^2-x-1)=-x^2+x+1$

Clearly the addition is commutative and associative. The subtraction is the the inverse of the addition.


### Multiplication
To define the multiplication, all we need is the distributive rule.

**Examples**
* $(x+1)(x-1)=x(x-1)+(x-1)=x^2-x+x-1=x^2-1$
* Vieta's formula $(x-a)(x-b)=x^2-(a+b)x+ab$
* $x^6(x^5+x+1)=x^{11}+x^7+x^6$
* $(x+1)(x^2-x+1)=x^3-x^2+x+x^2-x+1=x^3+1$
* The product of a degree $n$ and a degree $m$ polynomial is a degree $n+m$ polynomial.

### Division
To define the division of the polynomial, we need to introduce the long division. 

**Example 1**
To divide $x^2 - 1$ by $x+1$:

$$
\begin{array}{r}
x-1 \\
x+1 \overline{) x^2+0x-1} \\
\underline{x^2+x\phantom{00}} \\
-x-1 \\
\underline{-x-1} \\
0 \\
\end{array}
$$

So, $\frac{x^2-1}{x+1} = x-1$.

**Example 2**
To divide $x^2 $ by $x+1$:

$$
\begin{array}{r}
x-1 \\
x+1 \overline{) x^2+0x+0} \\
\underline{x^2+x\phantom{00}} \\
-x+0 \\
\underline{-x-1} \\
1 \\
\end{array}
$$

So, $\frac{x^2}{x+1} = x-1+\frac{1}{x+1}$. 

**Remark**: In this example, we see that there is a remainder for polynomial long division just like integer long division. Why? $x$ here is very similar to the roll of $10$ in the decimal system. The above two examples is like $100/11$ and $99/11$.

**Example 3**
Another way of doing long division:

$$
\frac{x^3+2x}{x^2-x+1}=\frac{x^3-x^2+x}{x^2-x+1}+\frac{x^2+x}{x^2-x+1}=x+\frac{x^2+x}{x^2-x+1}=x+\frac{x^2-x+1+2x-1}{x^2-x+1}=x+1+\frac{2x-1}{x^2-x+1}
$$

The degree of the result polynomial is always the difference between the degree of two polynomials.

**Example 4**

$$\frac{x^n-1}{x-1}=\frac{x^n-x^{n-1}+x^{n-1}-1}{x-1}=x^{n-1}+\frac{x^{n-1}-1}{x-1}=x^{n-1}+x^{n-2}+\cdots+1$$

**Example 5**

$$\frac{x^3+1}{x+1}=\frac{x^3+x^{2}-x^{2}+1}{x+1}=x^{2}-x+1$$

$$\frac{x^4+1}{x+1}=\frac{x^4+x^{3}-x^{3}+1}{x+1}=x^{3}+\frac{-x^{3}-x^2+x^{2}+1}{x+1}=x^{3}-x^2+\frac{x^2+x-x+1}{x+1}=x^{3}-x^2+x-1+\frac{2}{x+1}$$

In general, no remainder for odd degree polynomial but remainder for even degree polynomial. 

**Example 6: Remainder of the division by $x-a$**

If $f(x)=q(x)(x-a)+\text{remainder}$, then plugging $x=a$, we get the remainder equals $f(a)$.

If $a$ is a root of $f(x)$, i.e., $f(a)=0$, then the remainder is $0$. Thus $x-a$ divides $f(x)$ if and only if $a$ is a root of $f(x)$.

**Example 7**:
Factor $x^4+5x-6$. Plug in $2$ not working. Plug in $-2$ works.

$$\frac{x^4+5x-6}{x+2}=x^3+\frac{-2x^3+5x-6}{x+2}=x^3-2x^2+\frac{4x^2+5x-6}{x+2}=x^3-2x^3+4x-3$$

Always check $f(1)$ which is the sum of all coefficients and $f(-1)$ which is the alternating sum of all coefficients.










