## Lecture 8: Polynomials in one variable II

**Remainder of the division by $x-a$**

If $f(x)=q(x)(x-a)+\text{remainder}$, then we first observe that the remainder must be a number (degree $0$). If the remainder degree has larger than $1$, then we can continue dividing $x-a$.

**Example**: Consider $x^2+1/(x+1)$. The long division gives the remainder $2$.

**Theorem**: The remainder equals $f(a)$. In particular, if $f(a)=0$, then $x-a$ divides $f(x)$.

**Proof**: When we plug $a$ into the long division, we get $f(a)=0+\text{remainder}$. So the remainder is $f(a)$.

**Example revisited**: $x+1=x-(-1)$. So the remainder is $f(-1)=(-1)^2+1=2$.

**Example**: 
* the remainder of $x^2-3x+2$ divides $x-2$ equals $f(2)=4-6+2=0$.
* the remainder of $x^2-3x+2$ divides $x-1$ equals $f(1)=1-3+2=0$.
* in other words, $x-1$ and $x-2$ both divides $x^2-3x+2$. This is indeed the factorization 
$$x^2-3x+2=(x-1)(x-2)$$
* Factorization of $x^2+17x-18$. Consider $f(1)=1+17-18=0$. So $x-1$ divides $x^2+17x-18$ and the factorization becomes $x^2+17x-18=(x-1)(x+18)$.

**Applications to factorizations**
* $f(1)$ is the sum of all coefficients and $f(-1)$ is the alternating sum of all coefficients of the polynomial. Those are always easy to check first when dealing with complicated factorization problems. 


* Factorization of $x^2+17x-18$. Consider $f(1)=1+17-18=0$. So $x-1$ divides $x^2+17x-18$ and the factorization becomes $x^2+17x-18=(x-1)(x+18)$.

* Factorization of $x^2-17x-18$. Consider $f(-1)=1+17-18=0$. So $x+1$ divides $x^2-17x-18$ and the factorization becomes $x^2-17x-18=(x+1)(x+18)$.

* Factorization of $x^3-3x-2$. Consider $f(-1)=-1+3-2=0$. So $x+1$ divides $x^3-3x-2=(x+1)(x^2-x-2)=(x+1)^2(x-2)$. We can check $f(2)=0$ as well. 

**Theorem**: a polynomial of degree $d$ can have up to $d$ roots.

**Proof**: If $f(x)$ has a root $a$, then $x-a$ divides $f(x)$. Now $f(x
)=(x-a)g(x)$, where $g(x)$ is a polynomial of degree $d-1$. If $f(x)$ has more than $d$ roots, we do not enough degree to divide all of $x-a_i$. 

**Examples**:
* $x^2-3x+2$ has $2$ roots
* $x^2+2x+1$ has one (double) root
* $x^2+1$ has no root, but have two distinct complex roots $x^2+1=(x-\sqrt{-1})(x+\sqrt{-1})=(x-i)(x+i)$.
* $x^2-3x-2$ has one double root and one simple root.
* $(x-1)^n$ has one root with multiplicity $n$.
* $x^3+1=(x+1)(x^2-x+1)$ has one root and two complex roots.

**The Fundamental Theorem of Algebra (Gauss, the guy who did 1+2+...+100)**: a polynomial of degree $d$ have exactly $d$ roots when counting multiplicities.

**Factorization of a polynomial**
**Example**:
* $x^3+x^2+x+1=x^2(x+1)+(x+1)=(x^2+1)(x+1)$. You could also use $f(-1)=0$.
* $x^{5}+x^{4}+\cdots+x+1=(x^4+x^2+1)(x+1)$. You could also use $f(-1)=0$.
* $x^4+1=x^4+2x^2+1-2x^2=(x^2+1)^2-2x^2=(x^2+\sqrt{2}x+1)(x^2-\sqrt{2}x+1)$. No real roots at all. 
* $x^5+x+1=x^5+x^4+x^3-x^4-x^3-x^2+x^2+x+1=(x^2+x+1)(x^3-x^2+1)$. This is tricky and we do not know if we could factorize $x^3-x^2+1$ any further.
* $x^n-1=(x-1)(x^{n-1}+x^{n-2}+...+x+1)$

**Examples to more variables**:
* $a^2-b^2=(a+b)(a-b)$
* $a^3-b^3=(a+b)(a^2-ab+b^2)$
* $a^3+b^3=(a+b)(a^2+ab+b^2)$
* $a^3+b^3+c^3-3abc=(a+b+c)(a^2+b^2+c^2-ab-bc-ca)$. This is really unexpected.

**Rational expressions**
**Example**:
* $\frac{1}{(\frac{1}{a}+\frac{1}{b})/2}=\frac{2ab}{a+b}$. Harmonic mean of two numbers: average speed with half on speed $a$ and half on speed $b$.
* $\frac{1}{1+\frac{1}{x}}$
* $\frac{1}{1+\frac{1}{{1+\frac{1}{x}}}}$

**Last fun example:**

$$\frac{(x-a)(x-b)}{(c-a)(c-b)}+\frac{(x-a)(x-c)}{(b-a)(b-c)}+\frac{(x-b)(x-c)}{(a-b)(a-c)}$$

$$=\frac{(x-a)(x-b)(a-b)+(x-a)(x-c)(c-a)+(x-b)(x-c)(b-c)}{(a-b)(a-c)(b-c)}$$

$$=\frac{(a-b)x^2-(a^2-b^2)x+ab(a-b)+(c-a)x^2-(c^2-a^2)x+ac(c-a)+(b-c)x^2-(b^2-c^2)x+bc(b-c)}{(a-b)(a-c)(b-c)}$$

$$=\frac{a^2b-ab^2+ac^2-a^2c+b^2c-bc^2}{(a^2-ab-ac+bc)(b-c)}$$

$$=\frac{a^2b-ab^2+ac^2-a^2c+b^2c-bc^2}{(a^2b-ab^2-abc+bc^2-a^2c+abc+ac^2-bc^2)}=1$$




